====== START OF WEEKLY IRC KAMAELIA MEETING, 20061012 ======

1. Note of Agenda
2. Participants
3. Activity Reports
4. Discussion items (max 3 or 4)
4.1 Thursday 19th
4.2 Any open issues ?
5. Date/Time of next weekly meeting
Proposed: Fri 20th October 2006, 11am UK Time (GMT+0100)



2. Participants
Participating: mhrd (Matt), MS- (Michael)
Also attending: tav, c-ryan, Lawouach



3. Activity Reports

Michael:

    DONE - Working on presentation for next thursday
           TCP based systems tutorial
           offline redo of Kamaelia website to transform into wiki (see blocked)
           tried 2 USB audio cards for improving quality
           tested improving sample rate
           proof of concept for 360 degree possibility

    TODO - Finish presentation for next thursday
           try switching sample rate and downconvert
           Assets selector

    BLOCKED - Internal BBC meetings,
              office change related things
              Issues with Code for CDML renderer
                - works differently in two different contexts (needs debugging)
              PyMedia hates linux USB audio cards

Matt:

    DONE - pymedia audio components docs
           DateTime and local timezone parsing from DVB transmissions
           Investigations/experiments wrt. remultiplexing DVB streams
           Located Dirac colour bug - latest files not in release
           built RTP repeater and MPEG TS recovery & framing
             - implemented RTP payload type 33 (mpeg transport stream) repeater
           investigating clock reference/timestamp issues with mpeg ts in RTP
           clean installed a mac mini for the above
           fixed python 2.3 compatibility where 0xffffffff was used as a bitmask

    TODO - update kamaelia changelog :)
           fix dirac bindings for dirac 0.6.0
           investigate mpeg transport stream remultiplexing issues
           need to remove default queue size limits on threadedcomponent
           more website updates
           continue with DVB components
           make more pymedia wrappers (video)
           review/revisit experimental Timer component
           Improve box destruction to handle when a box is still linked
           experiment with pausing when waiting to deliver to a full inbox

    BLOCKED - bbc stuff


Michael pointed out that building pymedia video wrappers is pretty important but
the DVB & RTP remultiplexing work is higher priority at the moment (internal bbc
customer asking for it) ... assuming Matt is able to get the information he
needs to proceed.



4. Discussion items (max 3 or 4)

4.1 Thursday 19th

Michael explained that 2 things are happening on the 19th October which could
affect the profile of the project:

  * Externally: an article will be published in Linux Format, focusing on the
    whiteboard application but also with info on the underlying Axon/Kamaelia
    technology.

  * Internally (bbc): there is also interest in the whiteboard application, and
    Matt and Michael will be presenting their work and ongoing work ideas to an
    internal research board.

Presenting to the research board may result in:

  * more work on interative systems
  * more work on  network systems
  * extra internal effort (unlikely)
  * project being killed (rare historically)

Michael explained these things in order to keep people informed, and also
canvased those in attendance for ideas on where internal (bbc) effort could be
directed.

Michael explained that, personally, he was still interested in:

  * Ryan's logo interpreter system
  * Ryan's plans to redo pygame sprite handling
  * Lawouach's LLUP router idea (discussed earlier outside of meeting)
    (Essentially generic notification and subscription mechanisms)

LLUP refs:
http://dev.llup.org
http://www.russmiles.com/home/2006/10/10/does-this-sound-like-llup-or-what.html

Michael explained the LLUP idea has potential use in more efficient mashups and
is very similar in a way to the RDF router than the OpenMetaDir people were
working on when Kamaelia was less mature than now.

Matt mentioned that he had a potential spare-time Kamaelia project for an
internal (bbc) customer investigating use of mobile technology, that would need
XML parsing and would perform simple video processing.

Michael pointed out to Matt that there's an experimental XML parser in
Kamaelia.Experimental

Lawouach recommended 'Amara' - an efficient Pythonic XML toolkit, which Lawouach
has used for an Atom Pulishing Protocol implementation.

Michael also asked how people perceive Kamaelia right now (as in "what do you
see Kamaelia as useful for right now ?") Since whilst he knew what our aims are,
knowing other people's perceptions is useful. Michael asked for these to be
submitted by email.



4.2 Any open issues ?

Lawouach asked why Kamaelia hasn't followed PEP-8 nomenclature/style. PEP-8 is
the style guide for libraries to be included in the main python libraries.

Lawouach explained this was not a criticism but that it takes some time for
newcomers to Kamaelia.

Michael replied that originally the project started internally, and much of the
earlier style is based on his personal style, eg. 3 spaces (though slowly files
are moving over to 4 spaces). We've not gone for a wholesale change to
indentation since it breaks "svn blame" reports.

Michael also commented that "we are doing something slightly new, so somethings
can and should be worked out in that context".

Matt addressed some of the recommendations from the PEP from his personal
perspective:

  * multiple imports on the same line - personal laziness
  * aligning assignment operators over multiple lines - personal stubborn style



Matt suggested making shutdownMicroprocess and shutdown Ipc messages synonyms.

  * we were originally suppose to use shutdown rather than shutdownMicroprocess
  * doing this would fix that
  * we're not using shutdownMicroprocess for anything else anyway

Michael agreed it was worth considering.



Michael notified Ryan that he has added shutdown abilities to the TCP subsystem
(specifically the selector)



5. Date/Time of next weekly meeting
Proposed: Fri 20th October 2006, 11am UK Time (GMT+0100)



====== END OF WEEKLY IRC KAMAELIA MEETING, 20061012 ======
